Playbooks (#155)
populationgenomics/team-docs: playbooks/hail_batch.md

# Hail Batch playbook

## Batch

### Tool reports out of memory, but VM resources don't agree?

> Some tools run inside they're own virtual machine, inside the virtual machine (like docker on your computer). You can configure these tools to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some tools run inside their own virtual machine, inside the virtual machine (like docker on your computer). You can configure these tools to:
```

- Use the system memory,
    - but often they don't know how much system memory there is, sometimes they keep allocating if they need it, without releasing memory back.
- Use a specific [lower, upper] amount of memory:
    - Sometimes this gets pre-allocated, for example Java with the `-xms` flag will immediately appear to consume that memory, because it's reserving it for the task.

>     - Sometimes it uses it will allocate as required, up to some known limit (`-xmx`). This means Java may report out of memory, even though the host machine still has more memory to consume.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Sometimes memory is allocated as required, up to some known limit (`-xmx`). This means Java may report out of memory, even though the host machine still has more memory to consume.
```

Linked discussions:

- [https://centrepopgen.slack.com/archives/C030X7WGFCL/p1712182771574679](https://centrepopgen.slack.com/archives/C030X7WGFCL/p1712182771574679)

## Python jobs

Context:

Hail Batch Python jobs are a little bit of black magic. It uses the python packages dill and pickle to capture all the scope that a function needs. This could include:

  - `inputs`: this is done by pickling the value in a very generic way, so is usually very space and memory inefficient,
  - `outputs`: similar to inputs,
  - `imports` (especially for type annotations)
      - This can be very bad, as some imports (like subprocess) are very system dependent, and trying to pickle and reattach an import on a new system will almost certainly fail,
  - _variables declared outside a function_
  - any other runtime information it needs,

This makes for a really smooth user experience when it works, but a nightmare to debug.

Pro tips, make sure your function that you're calling is as self sufficient as possible, consider:

>   - REMOVING type annotations
>   - ensuring all imports are INSIDE the function
>   - NOT passing fully formed objects (dataframes, matrix tables, lists [which don't work anyway]),
>       - instead write the file to cloud storage in an efficient format,
>       - pass the PATH to the python job, and reload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - REMOVING type annotations
  - Ensuring all imports are INSIDE the function
  - NOT passing fully formed objects (dataframes, matrix tables, lists [which don't work anyway]),
      - Instead write the file to cloud storage in an efficient format,
      - Pass the PATH to the python job, and reload.
```

> ### Runs out of memory on job start-up

Reviewer 3: may be worth flagging that this can also manifest as a driver job to set up a batch running for hours, even if it does succeed

Author: ```suggestion
### Runs out of memory on job start-up / set-up job takes a very long time
```
